before the first tape recorder failed. I want to
know how you became interested in art. Well, I
became interested in art, namely, through my
mother was a wonderful artist in her own right, and
I was a pencil artist, essentially, when I was a
kid. I used to study her work. She took art in San
Antonio, you know, José Opa. became interested at
that time. I think he just had an innate feeling for
it all along that I wanted to do it, but I was
constantly filling notebooks and composition
books with cartoons and mainly core designs. When
I was in high school, I started in grade school when
I did quite a bit of scratching around with crayons
and things, but, uh, and, uh, I found a kind of a
soulmate or another companion, classmate that
loved art too, and then Tom Steele, and we both, uh,
I started car designs and worked on the high school
annual. And I started using pen and ink as an
essential medium then. But the art, of course, it
grew strong and strong all the time. And when I
finished school, I had done considerable
what's called automobile designing,
essentially. I took some lessons under a lady who
was in China paint. They taught China paint, and I
took some watercolor under her, and I got to feel
the watercolor then. But then there was a time, of
course, when I graduated from high school to go to
A&M. It hurt my father's insistence. I had no
intention of going to A&M, because I knew it was
military, and not to have a deeper version of
anything as discipline and regimentation. So I
went on to A&M. But he was certain that I'd take
electrical engineering. He had one of the Quarrel
boys named Charlie Dickerson, and he had a very
wonderful success, and he went to San Francisco
and installed all the electrical phases of that. I
guess he did, but anyhow. But Papa said, now
there's the man. He said, I want you to be like
Charlie Dickerson, be a great engineer. Well,
there was a German. There was strict
regimentation in the German family. It was bad
enough. Everything was mandatory. It was
suggested by the parents. But I went to A&M. I said,
well, I'll do it. And I did. And I had a rugged time of
it. I got in the military. And I was a pretty good
gold brick in that. Then I took this EE.
And I think Dr. Bolton was the head of the
electrical engineering department. But I
flunked every course. I wouldn't bring this in
very forcibly. But it was a show that how your kids
are going to react. And I ran mad. God, I must have
ran mad. And I passed one course, and that was
English under Dr. D.B. Cofer. And I remember he was
very wonderful. He was, you know, a genteel soul.
He said, you have a talent for writing. And so I read
all these essays and composition stories, and he
read them out to the class as an example of what...
But, of course, that was just an incidental... I
think it goes hand in hand with art to some extent.
It's an emotional experience. And I love putting
down things in words. I started, I'd say, at A&M.
But that didn't carry me through my freshman year.
because I flucked everything in. It was nice to
have. But I did, and I don't know what the procedure
was, but I was told that I didn't make my grades, and
it'd be best to go ahead and retire from school. And
I was worried. I mean, Papa found out about it. He
was awful put out with me because I couldn't pass my
grades. So I went to Dr. Brazell. I think the
registrar, Friley, told me to go see him. So he had a
nice visit with W.B. Brazell. And he's the one that
said, well, this is a shame. That should happen to
you. But I know you want to take a lot to him. I want to
go to Chicago and study art. He said, well,
somewhere we can work this thing out. I'm going to
call your father, which he did. I told Papa, I said,
now, listen here. Don't go ahead and be too strict
with this boy. And artistic talents. And Papa was,
but I was sorry and everything, blah, blah. And he
went on. So we decided what course to take. And I
said, how about architecture? I'd been up to visit
the architecture department. I got to know some of
them. They were wonderful. I had the department at
that time named Joseph Kellogg from the
University of Illinois, and they had brought him
in there. It was very genteel, wonderful. But he
gave me new inspiration and new incentive. So I
took my four years of architecture and came along.
just the opposite from what had happened in
England, but I had made good grades, and I think I
got some honors with it at the time. I don't recall
all these art studies. And I finished that and got
my M, a B, A in architecture. At the same time, I was
working, as I told you, on the college end. I had 21
and 22, and they were work outs. The art, uh, art
director, whatever it is, art editor. laying out
everything, making all the color play. If you've
seen it in the 21, 22, you'll see that it wasn't a
masterful work, but it was done for service. But it
took, you served all my time. And besides that, I
was rooming with part of that football team. But I
enjoyed that, too, with Bill McMillan, the
quarterback. He was the one that was on Beat Center
on New Year's Day, which was wonderful. It was his
pass, and Bill McMillan, and then another
All-American. But they were all from the
University of Tennessee named Bill Bradley.
But I took as much of that as I could. But I could not
go along with this routine that was happening. I
had to get out of the room in the dormitory so I could
finish my, essentially the annual work, which had
to come out. So that's when I took this place, I saw
Gaslight Hall, and I went up there to see what it was
like. I saw the top story there, and I said, Lord,
that would be an ideal studio. So I roamed around up
there, no creaky stairs and everything else, and I
said, my God, this is it. So I went to see Colonel
Ashburn about it. He was coming down at that time.
He said, no, I don't want you to do that. It's a fire
trap, but it's hazardous, climbing the steps, no.
I said, oh, so I just wish you could let me. He said,
well, we gave it every consideration. But I never
think nothing ever came out of it. He didn't make a
pitch of mine. So I just said, I'm going to go on up
there anyhow. Got me some fresh fish to bring up
there. All my art materials up in my files. This was
a breeze. I worked more than put in many, many
hours, 16, 18 to 20 hours a day. But I got the annual
out and finished my other work. But that shows what
the environment and the proper circumstances can
do for you, right set up. But I fell right in line. So
I went on and participated, you say, in part of the
master degree work in architecture, which I
devoted to landscape architecture under Fritz
Dr. Hensel. And I had a wonderful time with him. But
I got my thesis done, everything, but again, math.
But I mean, I was looking, I got math, but I'm not a
figurehead, I'm not a statistician. So I just went
ahead and got out of school. I like about, I don't
know, about four or five hours to get my math I could
have gone to summer school and rounded it out
there, but I said, heck with it, I'm just going to go
ahead. I said, I've got to be A, and that's nice
enough. I went home again, started with my car
designing at Tom Steele. And Papa finally said,
now listen, hey, see, I sent you to A&M. get a
reasonable education anyhow, or the semblance of
it. But he said, you've done well. And I said, it's
time for you to get out on your own. So I went to
Dallas. Took a train. He packed me, put me on the
train with a suitcase. And I kept going there. I
lived high off the hog with the family long enough.
And so I went to Dallas. And I rummaged the street. I
had a time in Dallas. I'm finding a cheap boarding
house. Stayed there. Had no money. And I went
around and started making the rounds of the
commercial artists, essentially. So I finally
found one man that took more or less the edge of my
name, John Doctoroff. And he was a wonderful
pencil artist. He did pencil portraits. And he did
what's called average weight, saddles and shoes
and everything else. So I showed him my work. But I
won't say what exactly his terminology was. But he
looked at my drawings. I said, man, here I am. He'd
answer, oh, my god. I don't want to repeat that. And
he said, what are you showing me this crap for? I
said, whoa, is it that bad? She said, you have
potential. Now if you want to come to work with me,
but I cannot remunerate you. I can't say that word,
remunerate you. And just go with me. I think,
again, I said, well, I'm just grateful for a chance
to be with you and have a rub off on what you're
doing. I said, I have tremendous admiration for
your work. So she set me up with no salary, nothing.
But I subsisted on, then I did some signs, show
cards, just went with this for, I think it was
Grant's, it was a big store there, but on the side.
Then I posed for Wilson's, no, for the
advertising, for the movie type of thing they had
at that time as a model for Victor Wilson Clothes
and some other drugstores. That's the best money I
ever made. It was about $8 an hour, just posing
clothes. But nobody ever knows. That's another
bracket I got into as a model. Now, when was this,
Buck? It was in 22 and 23. I got, because I got out of
A&M in 22, which is essentially 1923. It was hard
living, but the main thing was that I was so
engrossed with what I wanted to do in my career that
I went ahead. It took anything, even for, I mean, I
had a rough go of it, but I have no complaint. It was
worth it. Did you know of the artists before you
arrived in Dallas? I knew Guy Cahoon. There were
quite a few. He was the most reputable one in
Dallas. And I said, I'm going to aspire to get under
Cahoon. But I started to have a doctor off. And
finally I went to see Guy Cahoon, and he looked at me
and said, well, I'm not ready for it yet, but I will.
And I kept on, but I did. I took Cahoon's ads out of
the paper. He had a distinctive style in pen and ink
work. He did almost all the ads, real estate firms,
and he was an architect. And an architectural
delineator, which makes it perspective. And
there's my man. So I started in with him, and he
finally took me on. I said, I'll give you a try. And
all of a sudden, he said, my God. I picked up his
technique and everything else. And his style, he
just said, I've been looking for him. So I went to
work at $120 a week for him. And what I did, Patrick,
all of his work, I would say. When was this, do you
suppose? I was in, I think it was 24 or something
like that. Then I finally, I just had enough of a guy
came home, and he just, I pushed more and more off of
him. He just took off and made a tremendous lot of
money. So I was doing these delineations that I
told you of architectural buildings,
perspectives. And I went to show that to this
architectural friend of Thompson and Swain. I
said, I'm going to shoot to go for the highest. And
they were the most reputable architects in
Dallas, residents, essentially residential.
They did the Highland Park home, so I showed my
things to Mr. Swain, and they said, my God, we could
use you in perspective ways. Interior and
everything else, I went to work and did
perspectives, and I did study design under him,
but it was nice, because I had a wonderful man I
worked on. Anyhow, I finally got a little bit tired
of that, said, I'm going to my, see if I can go on my
own. But I had innumerable perspectives,
interiors and exteriors, for all the residential
and building. Then some Houston architects came
down, found out about me, and they said, come on to
Houston. It's wide open for an architectural
delineator like yourself. And so about 10 or 15 of
them got me down there. And I had a good go of it. I
went to Houston. Incidentally, that's when I
married my wife. So I met her in Devone Reynolds.
She was in the art department. They're handling
the art supplies. And she was essentially a very
good artist in her own right. So we went to night
school at Bryan High, and then we finally decided
we'd all team up and get married. Now, this is in
Dallas? It was Dallas where this happened, yes. It
was in Dallas. But you went to night school in
Dallas at Bryan High? Uh-huh, at Bryan. There was
an art course there, a very fine one, under a man who
did the posters for Majestic Taylor. But I learned
a lot from him. Now, of course, I continued with my
wife, and she stayed on. That's what made up our
move to go to Houston. and went down there and had a
rather nice school over there. It wasn't, but I
learned. Every time I was learning, I'd get in new
places, picking up new styles, new approaches,
everything, but I was out to learn. What year did
you start in A&M then? I started in 17. In 17. When
did you graduate from high school? 17. I thought
you went to the Army someplace between A&M and A&M.
I went in 18, yeah. Okay. I went in 18. I had to make a
change. They had, but they instigated the SATC,
the Student's Army Training Corps, and we had it
here. It was on me, so I joined up here. Had to be
drafted. And of course, went to, but we still had a
course, but it was essentially a military. But you
were stationed here then on the campus itself.
Then I had a decision to make. I went to, oh, they had
different branches, truck driving, what you call
it, or aviation, so I decided to go to aviation when
the time came to. I said, focus on one thing, which I
did. I passed the test. I don't know how it ended. So
I was supposed to go to Kelly Field and go to ground
school there. And then almost to the side, it was
out. Of course, I said, well, God, why didn't I? I
should have at least got a chance to fly. I'll go
over there and get battered and run
wrist-pulling. I said, fuck it. But, yeah, of
course, almost to the side. And I went back there,
and I started all over again. But I had a good go at
A&M when I went to architecture because I did about
four years of work in three years. But I was annual.
Tammy was annual. Where did you hear the Chicago
Institute of Art? What interested you in that?
Well, I just, now and then I run across work. I see
the ads. But I had no, no one from Cuero had ever gone
to the Institute. There was a lot of
correspondence courses. But I was told that was
the logic of some of the artists. I mean, I don't
know how in the world, but I knew that was the place
at the time. But I'm actually, I'm glad I didn't do
it. I tell you why, because if I'd have gone to that
particular school, like all others, it would have
been figure drawing, advertising, the same
routine all of them goes through. But then I got to
architecture when I learned about buildings. I
worked on the structure. I know what held the
building together, but I learned the essentials
of architecture. And that's what stood me
instead, because then I devoted to that. And I had a
field of my own. Nobody else was there. Only two men
in Texas were doing it. It was Cahoon and myself
later. But it opened a new door for me. Then I went to
New York, and my wife said, no, you've had enough of
this. Let's go on to New York, the headquarters,
big time. So we packed up. Now, this is not when you
leave Dallas. No, that's when I left Houston. How
long were you in Houston? Oh, let's see, from 26 to
20, I think, 28 years, two years in Houston. Then
you just freelanced in Houston? I freelanced. got
a nice account from Anderson Clayton, an
advertising program, 52 drawings for them, but
that was essentially illustration too. And uh...
Well that's not when you did the Anderson Clayton
Cotton Series, is it? I did a Cotton Series, no, and
uh, it was a fifth ad, oh I still had them here, 52. It
went, it ran in the Wall Street, 52 ads for Anderson
Clayton, a whole year. And it was a, it was a, great
thing for me because I learned about mobile
drawing and about the industry itself, which
stood me in good stead. And I took on some other, a
little more architecture stuff. I got to build up a
slight stockpile. I bought us a new car and went to
New York. And that was something else too, going to
New York in 1928. Actually,
We were in dire circumstances financially, but we
had to skimp and say, but keep the car and enough for
gasoline and food. So we actually ended up staying
on the filling station cannabis going up to New
York, selecting the car. And I remember one
incident, I might just bring it in, but we got, I
think it was Wheeling, West Virginia, a big mining
town. And we got there way late. Horrible fog, you
know, it was dismal. And it just, it just made me...
So we got onto the Philly station, went to sleep
under there, and the police picked us up. They
didn't take... I saw this text saying, what are you
talking about? God, don't you know any better than
to do this? Mining town, you could have gotten
murdered or raped your wife. So they'd come with
us. So they took me to the police, took us to the
police station, and took us upstairs and gave us
some cots to sleep on that night. Next week they
sent us on our way. But I always had a lot of trouble
with police force in the East. I got on one-way
streets in New Jersey and I got messed up and cussed
out being a dumb Texan. But it was, everything, to
my mind, it was an exhilarating experience. But it
was fun. I took it in that life. Everything happens
to me, always. But the attitude of my wife, she was
very good in H.H. Buffett. But we made it to New
York. And finally, I took about two weeks to get up
there, leisurely at the same time. That was an
awesome feeling when you got over to New Jersey and
got to the Dykeman Fair. I never forget that. I
looked over at that fantastic skyline. This is
the, oh my God, we're going to barge into the same It
just looked like they were going to engulf us. I
said, well, let's get with it. So we crossed it.
There was no place to stay. And somebody told us
about a spot on a Boston Post road or what. We saw
that in Washington, in one of the motels where we
had stayed one night. We went up there and drove
that road. We thought, oh, thank god. We're going
to find a spot to spend the night. Then we went into
this place. I have never seen anything as filthy
and dirty as that place was. So they took us there.
They had wood stoves. And just nothing worked, but
we spent one night that we could, and then we drove
on back to New York. And we called the last resort,
we called a relative of River Lee's. He was on the
Fawcett publication, George Bond. I remember
that very well. So they said, come on over to 108th
Street, where we stay in between Broadway and
Riverside Drive and have an apartment. So we drove
back up there and then went to see the Bonds. And
they... I said, God, this is terrible what's
happening to you all. It shouldn't happen. You can
do... Let's see, I believe there's a vacancy
across the street from 108th. Number 108th on a big
five-story apartment kind of like a townhouse.
And we went over there to see that. And showed up
some gracious people there. And I was a mason. I had
a Masonic pen on that time. He said, my God, a fellow
mason. He's a wonderful person. He says, come
here. The fifth floor is vacant. Went up there and
it was Victor Herbert's. His composing room was
called Corkman. Said, this is yours. He wanted it
for $50 a month. It was just a room and a kitchen and a
band. So that's where we stayed. And set our sales
up, I say, because then the real worry started.
There was no money, so we had to go around. Just
pound the pavements. Catch a C-Tech one side of the
street. Go see all the advertising points and
architects and magazines. And nothing happened
until I pulled this little funny story. trip of
mine, everybody knows about
it. That's what you call a chilly episode. So I
decided I had to do something. You couldn't get
where they ought. I showed them my things, and they
said, oh, this is wonderful. But nope, I got no
acceptance. I think it was just because the market
was pretty crowded. But anyhow, I said, I'm going
to do something. So I got me some Gephardt's chili.
in a stainless can heater and I had this old greasy
Stetson hat of mine. I put it on and I burned some
holes in it like bullet holes. Then I went up to see a
magazine called Pencil Points. The editor was Ken
Reed. And I went to, he came, I came in there and he
said, well, God, where you from? I said, Texas.
Well, where'd you get the bullet holes? Oh, I don't
know. We had a little run-in down at the bar. I was
working with some, any kind of story. Then I told
him, And we sat around. He got interested. Boy, he
was a terrific person. God, understanding. And he
looked at my work, and he says, my God, you've got
something here. I didn't know anybody from Texas
ever did this type of thing. Pencil drawings, I've
been doing all that time. From Washington, we'd
watch all the Carolinas. But I had a great sheaf of
just sketching, sketching. And he said, well, now
it's time for lunch. Why about us going out
somewhere? I want to give you a nice lunch. And I
says, well, I don't know, but I'm kind of used to
eating. I would have been eating down on the Texas
way now, but I have my own brand of vittles, of
course. I've got some with me, I believe. Chili, I
always carry with me. I got to stay in the heater.
Whenever I can, my wife would stop in the park, just
heat up and eat chili. Oh, you're talking about
now, isn't that some damn good thing? And I went
back to the shipping room with them and said, can I
have a place? So they all gathered around. I hit my
stand here and I opened that can of chili and poured
it down there. And they went, ah, let's get one more
pepper. And I believe it. Well, it's hot enough,
yeah. So we got some paper bowls and plates,
whatever. I carried those with me, too. And I
concocted my chili. I started eating it. I said,
you want to try it? They said, oh, come on, try it. I
said, no, Tony, you got to adjust it, Tony. She
said, man, we got to. We got cast out of
Stomachstown, Texas. So I went there, and I was the
first one. Then they just hooped and hollered at me
and said, bye, golly, you come on. So he took me out
to his house, his editor, a pleasant one. He went
and had a bridge digested and printed out there and
got my story. And he ran this beautiful story on me,
the pencil boy. And it opened the door, and it came
out to architects. I got calls from some of the top
men, but I said, I'm going to get... So that's when I
started studying under the top delineators
called pencil artists in New York. And they were
beautiful to me when they went to me, because I was
more or less an eccentric, whatever you want to
call it, silly, crazy Texan. But I had to just
always elaborate on everything in real Texas. I
just went after it. I had some old scrubby boots.
But I've got House Beautiful took me on, Pictorial
Review, all these old magazines. But everything
just fell into place beautifully after that. And I
went off and started teaching up at New York
University. And I don't know, I delivered. said,
we got a depression around the corner. That's just
before the depression. He said, it'd be better if
you all went on back to Texas. That's what Ken Reed
told me. That man was so good to me. Am I talking loud
enough now? Yeah, it's going fine. All right. And
so then we got a call from Paul Franke. He was up here
at the time. He was a cadet colonel and a big shot in
the I started an advertising agency. There was
just two of them. He got a mentor, and they were
handling the Anderson Clayton account. They had
gotten on the road with it, and then they said, by
golly, we need an auditor. And of course, they were
very close to me, because he's the one that put me on
this first 52 series for Anderson Clayton. So I
said, oh, I want to go home with my wife. I want to see
my family, my brothers. And we were put alone, just
down to Nubbin. I'd run through everything. My car
wasn't hot. I couldn't get a dollar. I had $20 a
month extra for my car. But I picked up enough money
to get on the road again. So we decided, let's go.
Packed up and just like that, we crossed the river
and started down. And how we got to Houston, buddy,
I think we came to Houston with 30 cents in our
pocket. But then I went on to see Frankie. And he
said, we can set up for you at the Cotton Exchange
building. Come on. I'd stay with us a while. And
we'd go on the motor. So I went and looked it over.
And I had some work for me to do. And here I go on this.
New Venture, a third partner in the advertising
firm. And things worked. It was a good deal. And I
got to still do my architectural work and was a
partner in the firm. And I always stayed in a
horrible place, but just like you were. So things
got right. But I don't know, from then on, it just
seemed like it was rather, we didn't have any work,
you know. We had just a handful of accounts. But we
finally picked up another here and there, just a
little. Finally got the umbilical cord. And that
was it. The ultimate. We worked at that big oil car.
It was handled by a New York firm at that time. So we
got hit and then we were well on the road then. I
handled all the advertising. I mean, the layouts
and the finished art. It was a work out, and we
picked them. Finally, I ended up with about 20
accounts. This is in 1930? This was in 1928 when I
came in. 1929, and stayed there. In 30, we got on the
road in the big way. But that was the fall of 1929
when I came in. Of course, the bottom did drop. The
depression came. Everybody, all my friends, just
completely wiped out. That's what it is. But we had
this forewarning about it. But from then on, of
course, I got more involved in the Houston scene
and working with art to find the fine arts in the
museums. But it was a haphazard type of thing, I
guess. What do you call it? All the time, I was out
jumping around trying to find answers. But that's
when the firm opened up there with Frankie and
Wilkerson. I stayed with them from then on out. But
it was a hard game, too. We finally got more
accounts. We got bigger and bigger. We kind of
ended up as second biggest agency in the state of
Texas. But it was a workout. I didn't know
advertising could be that hard. Because I was art
director, I had to get to lay outside and consume
ideas. Creativity, deadlines, deadlines,
deadlines. And that brought on some problems. We
all started that. But advertising is a killer. You
know, mortality rate in advertising I don't know
whether I should be putting this in there. Sure, go
ahead. As far as alcoholics are concerned, it's
the highest of any profession, because for that
reason, that is creativity and deadlines. And he
just had to strain and strain to get something out.
He said, oh, yeah, we get on the road with a good cut.
I call it cut. But every one of us got pretty much a
job, and so did our accounts. And that went on for a
while. It finally leveled off. But it was a
hazardous experience.
out of the West. I stayed with the agency, of
course. Then I got more into fine arts and
painting. I started submitting things to shows
and museums and shows over the United States. And
I've got some pretty good goals over there. I've
got an international watercolor show. I've got an
international and a national show. And I finally
got more and more absorbed with my painting, back
to the painting. So I started going down to
Galveston. Every spare minute I had was doing
watercolors in Galveston. I thought I'd made one
sum about 50, 60 watercolors, and started putting
them in shows, and got an entree in that area,
which I had aspired to. But I didn't look for
competition. I just wanted my thing to be seen. I
only got, I think, $25 or $35 for a watercolor then,
and $10, $15 for a pencil drawing. Of course, at the
moment, I'm just going to think, I'm just going,
Not sky high, but kind of another plateau. But that
was only the beginning. But see, all those things,
you just trace back your career. You get going
beautifully, and then wham, comes the roadblock,
and you get struck down. One thing after another,
it seemed like. But it was part of it. I mean, that's
why I like that verse. I don't know why, but some of
it. It kind of shook you. You get to so darn
complacent, and you get a few plaudits in the
crowd, and nice reviews, and... critics from the
paper and say, oh, this is dandy. And you get a
little bit of reticence to work with them. But, ah,
well as seen, oh.